
_Contents:_

1. [POD](#pod)
2. [Multi-Container PODs](#multi-container-pods)
3. [How to Deploy a Pods](#how-to-deploy-a-pods)
4. [Demo - Pods Deployment](#demo---pods)
5. [Pod Definition File](#pod-definitionyaml)
6. [Namespaces](#namespaces)

### POD

Kubernetes doesn't deploy containers directly on the worker nodes. The **containers are encapsulated** into a Kubernetes object known as **`Pods`**.

A Pod is a **single instance of an application**. A Pod is the **basic and smallest object** that you can create in Kubernetes.

_Q: What if the number of users accessing our application increase and we need to scale our application?_

আমাদের additional instance of the application add করতে হবে, যাতে করে load share করা যায় instances গুলোর মধ্যে 

_Q: Now wherer would you spin up additional instances?_

New `Pod` add করতে হবে with a new instance of the same application within the **`Node`**। মানে resource scaling করতে হবে `Pod` add করার through তে। 

`Pods` usually have **one-to-one relationship with containers** running our application.
- To `scale up`, new Pods add করব
- To `scale down`, delete existing Pods

Scaling করতে(application) আমরা existing `Pod` এর মধ্যে additional containers add করি না। Scaling করার ব্যাপারটা Pod এর সাথে related, container এর সাথে না 


### Multi-Container PODs

_Q: Are we restricted to having a single container in a single Pod?_

No. A single Pod can have multiple containers except for that fact that multiple container গুলো same kind নয়। 

We want the helper containers to live alongside our application container. এইসব ক্ষেত্রে আমরা containers গুলোকে same Pod এর মধ্যে রাখতে পারি। 

**`Helper Containers:`** যেই container গুলো supporting role হিসেবে কাজ করে for our main application like processing and fetching data from elsewhere.

**একটা Pod এর under এ multiple containers** can communicate with each other directly by referring to each other as localhost যেহেতু they share the **same network space** সাথে **same storage spcae** ও ব্যবহার করে। 


### How to Deploy a Pods



```shell
kubectl run nginx --image nginx
```



`Kubectl` deploys a Docker container by creating a Pod. It first **creats a Pod automatically** and **deploys an instance of the nginx Docker image**.

**List of Pods** in cluster

```shell
kubectl get pods
```
Get **more information related to the Pod**

```shell
kubectl describe pod <pod_name>
```

Check the status of the Pods

```shell
kubectl get pods -o wide
kubectl get nodes -o wide
```

### Demo - Pods

We are going to deploy a Pod in our minikube cluster


A note about creating pods using `kubectl run`

To **create a pod** from the command line, use the command:

**Create an NGINX Pod**

```shell
# quick way to create a new deployment with a specified Docker image
kubectl run nginx --image=nginx
```

As of version 1.18, kubectl run (without any arguments such as --generator ) will create a pod instead of a deployment.

To **create a deployment** using imperative command, use `kubectl create`:

```shell
kubectl create deployment nginx --image=nginx
```


### pod-definition.yaml


```yaml
apiVersion: v1
kind: Pod
metadata:
  name: nginx
  labels:
    env: production

spec:
  containers:
    - name: nginx
      image: nginx
```

#### Declarative Way
To create the same pod in a declarative way, we need to create a YAML file. The YAML file in Kubernetes for any resource must have 3 key values: _apiVersion, kind, metadata_

- **`apiVersion`**: Which version of the Kubernetes API you’re using to create this object
- **`kind`**: What kind of object that you want to create
- **`metadata`**: Data that helps **uniquely identify the object**, including a name string, UID, and an optional namespace
- **`spec`**: What state that you desire for the object


To create this object we will use the **`apply`** command

```shell
# the command is used to manage Kubernetes resources defined in YAML files
kubectl apply -f pod-definition.yaml
```

> Note the difference between “create” and “apply” commands. “create” can only be used for creating a **resource from scratch** while “apply” can be used to **create an object from scratch** and also update a change to it. The “-f” basically means file.


### Namespaces
Namespaces are intended for use in environments with many users spread across multiple teams, or projects. And for this need, Kubernetes supports multiple virtual clusters backed by the same physical cluster. These virtual clusters are called namespaces.

Basically, if we have big systems and we want them to be isolated, we need to put them in **different namespaces**


```shell
# checking the existing namespaces
kubectl get namespaces

# creating namespaces
kubectl create namespace <namespace_name>

# deploy nginx pods to specific namespace
kubectl run nginx --image --namespace=<namespace_name>
```